Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Loops. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Anna Alexandrova. She's a professor in
Philosophy of Science at the Department of History and
Philosophy of Science at the University of Cambridge, and
a Fellow of King's College. And today we're focusing
on her edited book Limits of the numerical, the
abuses and the uses of quantification. So, Doctor Alexandrova,
welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you for having me Ricardo.
So perhaps let's start with a fundamental question here
and also referring to the subtitle of your book.
What is quantification exactly? What are we referring to,
particularly in the philosophy of science? But in science,
more generally, when we use this term,
um it might, it sounds a simpler question than
it actually is um the simplest introduction. The simplest
definition of quantification is just putting numbers on things.
Uh BUT it's very easy to put arbitrary numbers
on things and it wouldn't be any good. So
when uh um we talk about quantification of phenomena
in science. So, for example, you know, figuring out
measures of uh light of distance of time we're
talking about um putting on warranted and justified numbers
that reflect some uh deeper structures such as the
amount of thing or the quantity of things. And
in order to do that, you need a very
thorough justification of what numbers you're putting in and
whether those numbers are um you know, have uh
you represent uh just levels or quantities or uh
mere uh a possibility of, of comparisons. So in
the book that uh we've edited, we've used um
uh definition of quantification um as follows. Quantification is
the deployment of numerical representation where these did not
exist before, to describe reality and to affect change.
And as you see there, uh there's uh several
ingredients uh deployment of numerical representation or could unpack
that. What exactly does that mean where there was
none before? So, so we defined it as a
process of like bringing in numerical representations to features
that were not represented numerically before that we talked
about, you know, quality of education well being uh
health and these are all very uh controversial things
to quantify and finally to describe reality or to
affect change. And that would just also reflects the
fact that quantification plays um uh many different roles.
So this is a long answer to a question
and probably not long enough because the question you've
asked is so difficult
and when it comes to quantitative data, of course,
we tend to have uh I guess among the
scientific community. But also in the culture, m more
generally, we tend to have or attribute this sort
of special or to numbers. If there's a number
associated with such something, we uh assume that we
should take it more seriously. Uh At least in
comparison to when we only have qualitative data, for
example, but are quantitative data, really precise value free
and objective or at least are they always like
that?
Um uh VERY much not um the um the,
the, the idea that uh uh quantities reflect um
uh a deeper reality than, than qualities is as
long standing as it is controversial. Lots of philosophers
throughout history did not think that our world is
a world of quantities. Uh BUT rather thought that
our world is a world of qualities on which
we impose quantities for a particular purpose. And then
uh when we impose a quantity on something, um
for example, uh well being uh uh how, how
is it possible to talk about uh precision value,
freedom and objectivity? Well, much harder than when you
think about uh numbers like uh you know, number
of deaths from COVID, even number of deaths from
COVID is uh uh it's very hard to achieve
precision value, freedom and objectivity because values hide in
your decision about what counts as a death that
can be attributed to COVID. How much after a
diagnosis do you have to die in order to
count as uh being a death from COVID. Um
So even with cases like this, uh uh there's
a lot of um uh value judgments uh and
background knowledge that has to come and with uh
things like um well being uh health uh quality
of life, um development, uh sustainability and all the
progress, uh it, it becomes all that much harder
which uh which doesn't mean that um you know,
values of precision, value, freedom and objectivity are not
genuine values. I, I share those values sometimes at
least, but we need to um bear in mind
that uh uh some quantities that we care about.
Uh THEY, they, they will be valued and that
would be good. Uh And they will, they will,
they will not be objective in the sense of
reflecting some uh um you know, reality that wouldn't
be there if people weren't there also not true,
but that doesn't make them any less good. So
um both precision value, freedom and objectivity. Those are
the things that need to be unpacked. Uh And
uh yeah, made more precise, so to speak in
order to uh uh to, to, to uh realize
the potential of numbers which is very important. And
numbers a enable uh comparison reasoning, allocation, decision making
uh representation uh uh m mu much better um
than uh uh qualities alone, right? You, you, you,
if you, especially if those numbers are um well
justified and combined with other information
and are qualitative data necessarily of inferior value scientifically
speaking.
Um So let's, let's think of an example. Um
um You asked me, uh so something that I've
been working a lot, um is uh well being
I've been thinking about that uh for the last
uh 15 years or so. Um So say you
and I have a conversation um um uh in
uh I don't know, we're, we're good friends and
I ask you, Ricardo, how are you doing? Uh
AND you give me a lot of information um
uh about your life um that concerns your priorities,
how you're handling challenges that you're meeting. Um What
kind of environment you live in? Right. And uh
um what kind of uh pressures do you feel?
And uh what are your dreams and your priorities
and whether you're flourishing and, you know, uh whether
you are sleeping well at night and things like
that. So let's call that altogether, qualitative information about
your well being. Um And let me, uh and
let me ask you now instead, um uh from
uh uh 0 to 10, how satisfied are you
Ricardo with your life as a whole? And uh
do you have a, a number that you would
give me, for example,
um Seven
seven is a favorite. Everybody loves seven and it's
very hard in science to get past that seven,
you know, and that seven doesn't really budge very
much um uh in response to uh you know,
changes in life. But in any case, you've given
me a seven. WHAT is the difference between the
two kinds of information that um that, that, that,
that you've given me the qualitative and the quantitative?
Like, what's your first uh I impression about in
value richness, importance of one or the other?
Well, actually, at least at first sight and in
my own opinion, I would imagine that the first
kind of information, the qualitative information seems more detailed
and richer than just the number a lot because
at least I have more specific information in terms
of the several different factors that play a role
into uh my uh play uh my manifesting uh
general seven as well being. So
that, that's great. That's my impression too. But can
you think of situations in which the latter uh
uh information that the number seven is more appropriate
or more sort of apt and is uh you
know, contains more information than, than the, than the
first kind?
Well, I mean, when it comes to well being,
uh I don't know, perhaps I'm missing something here
or forgetting something. But uh a as I said,
with the other kinds of information you have about
me qualitatively speaking, I would still think that perhaps
uh apart from perhaps uh statistically treating the data,
the first kind of information would still be more
informative, at least in my opinion. So,
yeah, yeah. So I, I mean, I, I agree
with you. It's very hard not to see the
the, uh, not, not, not to think that the
first kind is, you know, superior and better reflects
well being. But you can also imagine that if
you had a lot and lot of uh answers
to the, uh life satisfaction, quantitative question and if
you had those answers over time, then, uh they,
you would be able to see the patterns, um,
that you wouldn't be able to see in the
first kind. Uh Right. So let's just start with
that initial obvious observation that there's a richness that's
reflected in an answer um uh that you give
to a friend how you're really doing. And that
richness is suddenly completely lost when you uh just
put a single number on it. But then suddenly
if those numbers are combined with other numbers, then
then a certain kind of new richness arises that
wasn't there before. Uh RIGHT, the richness of being
able to see change and be able to see
patterns and being able to see differences and inequalities
between people. So I think it is the first
thing is to recognize that uh qualitative and quantitative
information carries different kind of uh uh value and
different kind of uh priorities and, and different kind
of information. And uh it's, it's obvious that there
isn't a single answer to the question, which information
is better, well, which information is better for what
purpose? Right. Uh So yeah, your question was our
qualitative data of inferior value. Uh Well, Yeah. So
obviously not, but neither is it the case that
uh uh qualitative data are always of uh superior
value? Right.
Yeah. So uh do you think that it would
be safe to say that when trying to evaluate
if in particular cases it is better to have
qualitative or quantitative information that it also at least
to some extent depends on the goals we have?
Definitely. So let's use that with uh let's try
and insert some goals in our example. So you've
got uh you've got two kinds of information. Uh
The first one is the one you give to
a friend, the rich narrative. Um Suppose your friend,
suppose it is, it is uh the conversation happens
with your life coach or your therapist or your,
your rabbi or somebody who is a really important
mentor who is trying to help you with uh
difficult important decisions. Um They might ask you um
well, tell me how has your life changed as
a result of something? They, they'll still be, they'll
still want to get some kind of quantitative information
if, if they're gonna want to make comparisons, right?
How has your subjective sense of how you are
doing evolved over time? Right. And are you doing
better than before? So they might uh even even
in situations like this, ask for some kind of
uh um uh quantitative information and in the, in
the sense of uh relation between other values, right?
If that's what we mean by a quantity. Um
AND you think that would be really great. Uh
On the other hand, um you could see uh
like, uh you know, a policy maker, um you
who needs to decide how much money to spend
uh to in a community or in a particular
initiative. Um What, what information do do they have
to have? Well, again, if uh if all they
have are life satisfaction judgments uh from um you
know, of the kind that you have given me
seven out of 10 and you know, well, but
from a bunch of people over time, you know,
even then you might think that, you know, that
information, that's much better information for them to have
for, for their decision. But again, in order to
decide whether or not to invest in uh say,
you know, a new playground or a new library
or a new piece of infrastructure, um it's not
enough for them to just have those life satisfaction
judgments because life satisfaction judgments cover so much. They
don't really, you know, they're not very detailed there,
they speak umbrella terms that, that, that, that the
black box, a lot of information. Uh So it
would be much better if they were also able
to have some qualitative information about, you know, how
do people feel about uh a particular resource and
how do, what does it mean for them? Right.
So in, in all of, you know, in every
situation uh we encounter the ideal is to have
some kind of a mix between a qualitative and
quantitative, but exactly what kind of mix it is.
And uh you know, where that, that will definitely
depend on the situation. You might think that a
policy maker who merely relies on uh um you
know, the sort of qualitative reports about what people
told them, them about uh uh a new piece
of infrastructure, they are making decisions on the basis
of anecdotal data, right? They aren't really uh doing
their homework properly. Um Whereas that kind of an
anecdotal uh data is uh is, is, is perfectly
enough if you are trying to help a friend,
make a difficult decision, right? So these are uh
and there is no situation in science that I
think is one or the other most situations in
which we make judgments of uh well being or
health will be a complex mix and the hard
thing will be figure around figuring out um the
the appropriate mix.
And so uh since you mentioned political decisions there,
and because as I mentioned a couple of questions
ago that there's this sort of uh stereotype surrounding
uh strict division between quantitative and qualitative data. And
there's even perhaps, I think we could say two
different cultures surrounding these two different kinds of data.
What are the potential social and political consequences of
having a framework like that where people think that
there's a strict division and they perhaps should take
more seriously where as a quantitative uh aspect to
it,
right, a very important question. So, the idea of
there being two cultures is um um a very
important idea from uh um uh a British thinker,
writer CP Snow. Um That's a culture of a
humanities thinker and a culture of a science thinker
fundamentally at odds. And um uh how, how, how
good it would be uh if they weren't. Uh
So in that sort of meme of two cultures
uh evolves and uh comes with, comes uh in
our age uh in slightly different ways. And if
you don't mind again, I will use the example
of, of well being to, to, to focus us.
So, uh in some ways, the um well being
research has uh existed um historically, very much in
the humanities culture. Uh uh It's a, it's a
purview of um uh writers of literary scholars of
historians of uh psychoanalysts of um um uh religious
thinkers, right? And because it's about who we are
at the same time, there's a long history um
from in economics and psychology, at least from the
age of enlightenment of uh attempts to quantify it
and impose uh uh a quantity of utility, for
example, that's supposed to represent uh uh uh welfare.
So by the time that uh comes uh um
uh uh to, to us in about, you know,
about 3020 years ago, there is the story that
you keep hearing uh um well being can replace
uh um uh gross domestic product, for example, or
gross national product is the, the the the the
really important quantity um for, for decision making, if
only we figure out and we, we collect proper
uh data about them, right? So um if only
we turn uh well being from one culture to
the other culture. So the sciences of well being
as I know them, uh um the social sciences
are dominated largely by psychologists and economists arises out
of that idea that um um you know, let's
uh let, let's appropriate well being from the uh
from the humanities culture and let's make it an
object of science so that we can um use
this as a much more appropriate and, and the
justification for that is very idealistic, right? The justification
for that is otherwise we're gonna be stuck evaluating
our societies by wrong yardstick of money. Um So
let's evaluate it with better yardstick with things that
people actually care about if we figure out how
to measure them properly. Uh So, ironically, this very
idealistic story isn't is actually um yeah, so has
a darker side in my view and that is
because in order to quantify it, it, it, it
something like well being, you have to really cut
a lot of corners, uh uh you have to
simplify what it is, you have to ignore a
lot of um problems with, um you know, measurement
doesn't actually allow you to, to average over uh
uh data that is uh nearly original. Um I
think we're coming to that shortly in our conversation.
All this is to say that in order to
turn well being into an object of science, you
have to make a lot of compromises. And the
question is whether these compromises um uh are compatible
with that idealistic vision, that's uh that people who
propose uh uh quantity of well being is I
don't think it is because if, if you, if
you leave everything else, like as is that means
if you don't change the idea that in order
to make good decisions, you need to justify them
by quantitative measures, then uh turning well being into
quantitative measure isn't progress because you also have to
uh change that perception, you have that the only
evidence based decision is a decision that's justifiable by
numbers.
And so focusing on quantification, are there different types
of it?
Yeah. Um WE probably should have brought that in
already. So uh let's just make uh one very
familiar um distinction between ordinal and uh interval data.
So, or uh data are data that allow you
to just compare, um say that 11 state is
uh uh greater better or has more of it
than another. So if you say um I'm satisfied
with my life uh as a whole, it you
at uh uh seven me actually at eight and
then all we could infer from ordinal data is
that I'm better off than you. Um Assuming that,
you know, you and I are using the scale
uh in the same way. However, if uh we
thought that we had interval data, that means if
we had uh quantities that in uh that give
us not just order, but also the distance between
them, then we'd be able to say that, you
know, I am happier. I have a better higher
well being than you buy that much. And uh
so, so, and then you could, you could uh
make that complicate, further complicate, complicate this further by
asking, you know, is there such thing as a
zero point um where you are, you know, neither
uh badly off nor well off. Uh And you
would call that ratio data. Uh So, um there
are very many different types of quantification and because
it's not written in the sky, what quantity is
in some ways people invent uh uh what counts
as a numerical representation. Um And uh sometimes those
mix the, the, the different numerical representations mix. So
people use merely or replies and then average them
in statistics. Um uh uh THEREFORE trying to derive
interval answers from ordinal data. And some people say
you can't do that. Some people say actually you
can um uh uh but all this is to
say that um you know, just uh when, when
people just tell you that I've got quantitative data,
you can still ask a lot of questions about
what kind of data you have and whether um
you know, yeah, it's very easy to put numbers
on something but uh doing it well uh is,
is a, is a, is a whole other um
complications. So, yeah, I don't think there is uh
right now any kind of um uh interval uh
data about well-being. Um That is that is possible
to have, I think ordinal quantification about well-being is
conceivable, but that's different for other uh objects, right?
So uh you know, interval data about uh length
is fine, interval, data about time is fine. Um
uh HEALTH is more complicated. Um So the story
of quantification is the story of trying to figure
out what exactly are the rules for quantities in
different spheres, right? And the, the big philosophical story
there is, you know, we, we want to try
and figure out context free rules for how to
quantify things. But that's not really possible because how
to quantify something has to depend on that thing
that you're quantifying and knowledge about that thing is
necessary for you to even begin to have a
conversation about what um yeah, what a quantity is.
So these next two questions, I think that in
a sense we've already been talking about them. Uh
But what would you say are the limits of
quantification?
Um uh LIMITS of quantification is uh OK. First,
by what kind of quantification. Um uh MINIMALLY quantification
requires uh, setting in um, a level of something,
um, relative to another level and another level and
another level in such a way as you'd be
able to compare different levels, right? And you have
to be able to compare it across, uh, uh
people who you're quantifying or states that you're quantifying
and you across context as well. So, um, you
have to, if you know, if you've taken a
questionnaire in uh in uh Porto and I've taken
a questionnaire in Cambridge, England. Uh We need to
be able to say that it means uh it
is comparable. We can, we can derive things from
it or, you know, people who study uh economic
inequality and they've got data about um you know,
the, the um how unequal is distribution of resources
in Porto versus in, in, in Cambridge. Again, we're
gonna have to uh be sure that tho those
things we've got are comparable, right? And if for
them to be comparable, we need, we need to
know that certain things remain uh the same, you
know, that that certain level of wealth means the
same in Cambridge as it means in, in, in
Porto, et cetera. So the biggest limit to quantification
is uh uh uh the fact that it is
difficult to justify such comparisons. We want these comparisons.
It is uh you know, we all are very
happily con con consume. Uh A about um uh
yeah, how much more unequal is a uh is
certain country than another, how much more happy is
a certain country than another, how much more developed
is a certain country than another. But in order
to make these justifications, uh the, the, these kind
of quantifications, you have to uh be sure that
uh that, that you are not comparing apples with
oranges, that you are turning things into all apples
or all oranges. So, um what is the, what's
the, what's the limit? It's the fact that people
forget how much uh controversial uh assumption goes into
a single uh uh even even what looks like
a simple ordinal uh quantification.
Mhm And what would you say are then the
biggest strengths or the strongest arguments in favor of
quantification?
Yeah, great. Let's go back to our um our
example of two kinds of information you could give
about uh uh well being of someone. So we've
already discussed how it's true that information about your
life, deep information about your life carries carries a
lot of uh really relevant content whereas a single
number doesn't. But when a single number is combined
with a lot of other numbers, it might carry
a lot of uh you know, I information that
wasn't there before. So in economics, for example, strongest
arguments, uh um strongest things that quantification has uh
uh enabled. He is um uh yeah, being able
to uh make very transparent, very clear and very
digestible arguments about uh say superiority of one policy
over another. Um uh When uh uh there is
a really important book called Trust In Numbers by
Ted Porter. Um And that uh tells the story
of how cost benefit analysis came to be, which
is one of the uh great examples of triumph
of quantification in the social sphere. There is no
uh there's no big, well, hardly any big decisions
uh made without cost benefit analysis in today's democracy.
Well, Brexit was uh uh but that's uh uh
but that's another story. Um But why is uh
cost benefit analysis? Uh A nice thing to, to,
to do and to have, well, it's because if
you are um if you, if you have rules
about how you quantify all the benefits and all
the costs and then lay them out that enables
other people to check that you have done a
good job. It, it creates a very transparent system
that can uh provide accountability for decisions and it
enables democracy, it enables participation and it enables oversight.
So um sure it will introduce a lot of
simplification because how could you possibly quantify something um
as big and philosophical as a cost and the
benefit. But if you, if you do it thoroughly
with uh systematic procedures and treat all cases alike
and uh um uh put in the work, then
other people will be able to check your work,
right? And then we have something to talk about.
Uh ABOUT whether or not you've made a good
decision, whether you, whether the evidence justifies investment in
a particular piece of infrastructure. So that kind of
enabling of accountability, oversight and then representation as well.
You know, the there is no way if you,
if you really want to expose a certain injustice,
there's nothing like showing the numbers behind it. There's
nothing like showing um uh for example, level of
um uh sexual violence or levels of uh um
um a certain kind of uh uh I don't
know, economic injustice. If you, if you put the
numbers in, in front of people, look how ter
how look how unequal outcomes are for different groups
of people um for, for, for, in a particular
context. Um Numbers are amazing at that. Uh So
and ignoring numbers is uh a very, very big
mistake and trying to, to, to, to get away
from them is a, is a very big mistake.
So numbers have uh a power, a power that
can be abused. Well, that's the case with everything,
right? Uh So, and which is why I think
it is uh uh a really big mistake to
sort of um uh speak in a blanket ways
about uh uh Yeah. Good quantification, good or quantification
bad. Mhm
So earlier, we've talked about CPS, no idea of
the two cultures in science. And uh the, the,
the way that we tend to think about quantitative
and qualitative data as strictly separate but ha have
you seen that uh society's relationship to numerical data
has changed over time? And if so, in what
direction
on the one hand, um we live in a,
a more quantified world than ever. Um Many of
us were um uh trackers uh that uh you
know, tell us how many steps we take a
day and how mu how many hours of sleep
we get, we get um we are more surveyed
than ever before. Um uh You know, every time
you uh post a video on youtube, you will
know how many views it got and your impact
and your growth will be often evaluated on the
basis of these numbers. So, on the one hand,
uh um uh we've uh you, you could think
that of modern history is a triumph of quantification
at the same time. Uh uh uh uh CON
construction of numbers uh um requires a great deal
of expertise and some uh uh of these numbers
will be greatly uh questioned more than others. So,
uh what is known and what, what, what I
think is familiar to many of us as a
crisis of expertise or a rise of uh a
special rejection of expertise. Um WHETHER it is about
uh pandemic policy or economic policy or, or anything
else or, you know, rejection, for example of um
uh cer certain uh kind of medical advice uh
right, all of that um uh is often comes
out out of skepticism for the numbers that are
being, uh, that are being put forward. So, you
know, you can quantify, uh, uh, a lot of
things, um, astrologically you could measure people's heads. Uh,
YOU could measure the number of words they use
or, you know, or the, whatever the number of
brain cells, uh, they have, you could have them
have, uh, do, do questionnaires about, uh, IQ and
you could be fantastically skeptical about those numbers, meaning
anything at all, right? And you could have all
sorts of reasons to ignore them. So which is
why it is that the story of quantification is
not a story necessarily of triumph.
Mhm So before we move beyond our discussion about
quantification, I have uh one more question about it.
So uh do you think that it would be
ethical for, for example, politicians, political institutions to manipulate
the public with numbers if that has some sort
of good social effects?
Well, it's easy to say uh no, it wouldn't
be right because mani manipulation is always wrong, but
you look uh uh closely to it and it
begins to look more complicated. So, um if you
know, for example, you know, if you as a
doctor presenting a patient with certain options, um and
the patient has a lot less information and a
lot less expertise than you do about it. And
uh you have an idea about uh uh what
is better for that uh patient, right? Um uh
YOU know, what, what is, what will save their
life. Uh For example, you may, well, you, you
wouldn't be mani, would it be manipulating to present
uh those data that make it more likely for
the patient to agree to a procedure? Uh I
mean, yes and no. Right. Yeah. Um So exactly.
Uh OR for example, as the government that uh
um uh you know, has certain data about uh
um uh the, the, the effect of smoking on.
Yeah, health and cancer. Um uh Well, are they
manipulating these data if they, if they present them
in such a way as makes it more likely
that people stop smoking? Um uh I think uh
in general, um oh yeah, of course, we've, you
know, we know how we know how mu how,
how much uh abuse can happen with a certain
deployment of statistics, um certain deployment of numbers, but
then abuse can happen with deployment of narratives as
well. Uh It's actually, yeah, very easy to uh
you know, tell a story and, and capture imagination
and uh and destroy uh uh a wealth of
expert knowledge um uh just with a single story.
So um uh I think manipulation, all this is
to say that manipulation will happen either way. Uh
And I don't think uh the manipulation of numerical
is uh any less problematic or any more problematic
than the manipulation of the qualitative. And the only
thing we can do to resist that is to
have uh um yes, to have uh to, to
support people in our democracies who, whose job it
is when they look, when they see something that's
wrong and that's false. Who say so? Right. And
who say so without fear of being attacked? Um,
SO a class of uh experts that are able
to uh see uh b yes, so to speak.
Um, AND know that it is there and be,
be able to speak up. They are completely essential
to our democracies and our welfare.
Mhm So another topic that I would like to
ask you about today is uh a thick concept.
So what are a thick concepts exactly?
Uh Thank you for asking a thick concept is
a notion that philosophers have known about um um
since mid 20th century, philosophers like Bernard Williams and
Elizabeth Anderson and uh uh uh Hillary Putnam have
uh written on it extensively. Uh Thick concepts are
interesting because they both uh describe and they evaluate.
So for example, a concept like uh uh shame
or courage, it tells you what a person is
like as well as saying that it is a
virtuous person and, or, or a, or a vicious
one in, in a particular way. And uh the
reason why they are really tricky and interesting from
philosophical point of view is that sometimes the descriptive
and the evaluative cannot be uh uh separated and
they are entangled in a way. So philosophers of
language Um uh And ethicists often pore over the
significance of this uh uh concepts that are, you
know, both describe and evaluate and apparently can in
a way that cannot be separated. I however, am
interested in the concept as a philosopher of science
because I think a lot of objects of science
um in the social and biomedical sciences are thick
and they are uh um health um um security,
sustainability, uh well being quality of life, frailty um
resilience uh and so on. I can, I can
go on. Um So modern science studies thick concepts
because otherwise it wouldn't be studying, if it didn't
study the concepts, it wouldn't be studying things that
are of interest to uh communities that enable them.
It's a, it's a responsibility of sciences to study
phenomena denoted by thick concepts. And yet they raise
a genuine challenge to science because they require making
value judgments and scientists um aren't particularly trained to
make good value judgments and are, aren't particularly trained
to oversee each other's value judgments. Peer review isn't
particularly good at handling, you know, have you made
your thick concepts? Well, and apt so as a
result, um when scientists study thick concepts, they're very,
they're often tempted turning them to turn them into
thin thin concepts that are just technical terms. Well,
I don't care what well being is, I'll just
say life satisfaction rating, that's what well being is.
So that's called operational. And you know, when you,
when you say that, you know, the thing that
I study is, is what I can measure and
I'm not interested in what that thing really is.
Um, OR, you know, or, or they, or they
say that, you know, well, uh, you know, I
know what well being is and I know well
being is amount of pleasure. So I'm just gonna
go ahead and measure the amount of pleasure and
call that well being in both of those cases,
whether you're turning something into a technical term or
with the way you, you were deciding to make
the uh well being judgment, the value judgment yourself.
Um You're not doing very good responsible science because
um about exactly what is responsible science when it
comes to fake concepts uh isn't clear. Uh So
that's what, that's something I've been talking. I've been
writing about with my uh uh co-author uh like
Mark Fabian Diane Coyle, Alexandra Basso is, how would
you um responsibly treat uh things like thick concepts
and whether do they need special rules uh in
scientific method? Um I, I think that's an open
question. I don't have all the answers, but it's
a really urgent question that I think philosophers need
to be uh talking about and scientists too. That's
the hope
it's an open question. And in your work linking
this to another idea you talk about, for example,
the democratization of measurement. And uh you suggest that
perhaps a way of dealing with issues as you
mentioned there, as you described there surrounding thick concepts
would be actually this to democratize measurement. So what
is uh the democratization of measurement exactly? And what
would it entail for science?
Suppose you agreed that thick concepts are important to,
to study and thick concepts are inimitable. That means
you agree that scientists need to make value judgments
in order to um proceed even with such basic
activities as measurement. Um AND then who's gonna be
making those value judgments? So for example, suppose you're
tasked with measuring well being as a um as
a psychologist, is it OK for you to just
say, well, well-being is how people feel. Therefore, I'm
going to measure how people feel. Oh really? Well,
are you sure? Well being is how people feel,
how people feel about what exactly uh you, if
you, if you're doing this all by yourself, you
or if you're doing it by relying on uh
I don't know what your predecessors have done you
in some ways, monopolizing judgments about well being in
a way that is wrong because you're not actually
qualified to do that. Um If you took seriously
the duty of uh a studying phenomena denoted by
the concept, you would want to involve other types
of expertise in deciding um what the third concept
denotes and how it can be responsibly measured. Maybe
some people will have lived experience uh of, of,
of this phenomenon. Suppose you want to measure um
uh what it means to thrive under uh uh
financial insecurity. That's a project that I've done recently
with a UK charity called Turn To Us. Um
It would be really wrong. Uh I've had a
lot of different kinds of insecurity in my life.
Um You know, I'm an immigrant uh uh uh
from a country with a bad passport. Uh BUT
I have not really known um homelessness, right. But
it, so it would be wrong for me to
decide what is thriving, having never experienced homelessness and
having not talked to people who have. So when
we talk about democratization of measurement, we're talking about
involvement of people with different kinds of expertise, including
lived in expertise in the very delineation of the
object of study. And I don't see how it
is possible to be a responsible scientist uh interested
in the concept without doing something like that. But
there are different ways of involving uh you know,
it doesn't mean you have to, you know, always
open up your measures to a democratic vote, but
you definitely do have a responsibility not to monopolize
as a scientist, the value judgment.
Mhm uh Could you tell us a little bit
more about that case study that you did with
uh turn to us to understand perhaps a little
bit better about how uh coal production would work
uh within this framework of democratizing measurement.
Thank you. So, coproduction is a word uh that
gets used in very many different ways in philosophy
and science studies. Uh Some people say that uh
um yeah, co production is uh you know, a
co evolution of science and uh uh technology and
society at once. And other people talk about co
production as uh you know, creating uh products um
with users in mind. Uh CO production as Mark
Fabian and I um uh have explored um because
of our uh uh experience of working with uh
uh the, the anti poverty charity turned to us
is uh the following sense, we want to figure
out how to croce definitions and measures of uh
uh uh phenomena denoted by thick concepts in a
way that includes different types of experts. So we
think there are three different sources of expertise. If
you are interested in ethic concept, like well being
or sustainability or resilience, there's your expertise as a,
as a scientist or, or a philosopher where, you
know, you know, relevant theories and you know, how
measures work, you know, psychometrics, you know, metrology, you
know, how difficult it is to quantify things. Uh
Then there is the lived expertise of what it's
like, for example, to um gain resilience as a
person or a community uh or what it's like
to live in um uh to, to be able
to thrive um uh under financial insecurity. Um So
that's a second kind. And then the third kind
is professional expertise, expertise of uh you know, front
level, uh front line bureaucrats um of social workers,
of charity workers who try to figure out um
how to provide certain services, how to uh to
relief. So there probably are other cases. Uh THERE
probably are other sources of expertise, but those are
the three that we thought was uh enough for
our case. So if you really want to cope
uh to democratize measurement of uh scientific uh of
thick concepts uh to coro you want, you want
to croce them and to croce them, you want
to include all three types of expertise. And then
if you manage to produce, maybe they will maybe,
maybe nothing will ari arouse of maybe maybe no
single concept can uh respond to all three, right?
And can can maybe there will be no agreement
in the end between three types of expertise in
which case, you're not gonna have a measure. But
if you thought, you know, if you, if you
did, then that would be the, the, the co
production ideal uh that, that we're looking for and
we think it is sometimes possible.
Mhm You know, a a very interesting thing that
I would like to comment on and perhaps ask
you another question about the uh that you mentioned
there is the fact that you also include lived
expertise or lived experts in this endeavor because I
mean, we've already talked here today about how we
tend to put uh quantitative data above qualitative data
in terms of rigorousness, for example, and how seriously
we should take those data scientifically. But i, it's
even more common perhaps for the people, even many
times, scientists themselves to uh dismiss um, the, the
lived experiences of people they are studying and perhaps
when it comes to trying to understand uh their
psychology, for example, imposing certain ways of rationalizing their
own experiences when they themselves perhaps have not experienced
it.
Right. Mhm. Um There'll be a number of biases
that any expert is prone to make. Uh And
that will be true whether or not you're a
lift expert, whether or not you are an academic
expert or whether or not you are a professional
expert. And uh there is no reason to focus
uh more or exclusively on the biases connected to
the lived expertise than any other. Uh So my
worry with uh philosophers who uh and scholars who
say, well, we can't include the people um in
our studies because they're biased or they are ideological
or they are um misinformed. Um Because uh yeah,
for obvious reason that that's uh um tends to
represent uh you as not being subjected to such
biases. So it's very difficult to do co production.
Uh YOU, it will force uh if we really
did that systematically as, as I'm asking scientists to
do, we would uh be forced into many uncomfortable
situation talking to people that, uh you know, with
views that we hate talking to uh people who,
who are uh you know, much more ignorant and
dismissive about each other's work. Um uh So, yeah,
it will be uncomfortable. It will be a time
suck. It will be, it will, it, it will
put us out of our comfort zone. It will
jeopardize projects. It will make science much more difficult,
much more ex expensive. But that's the price of
studying the concepts.
Mhm. And perhaps in certain situations, it would force
researchers, scientists to go back to the drawing board
when it comes to the way they have conceptualized
or operationalized uh their own objects of study.
That's a great way to put it. Thank you.
So, uh one last uh topic then that I
would like to ask you about what is uh
pluralism from the perspective of philosophy of science and
particularly with this conceptual and methodological pluralism entail
pluralism is um uh a big topic nowadays. And
because um a lot of philosophers of science are
exploring ideas that it would be uh good uh
for science to be more pluralistic about its um
you know, choice of methods and choice of uh
theories. Um It's also a controversial topic because, you
know, as soon as you introduce pluralism, uh then
uh uh uh for many people, you're opening the
gates of hell and opening uh um the, the
gates of um you know, well, let's be pluralist
about whether or not vaccines work and let's be
pluralist about whether or not um uh they cause
autism and things like that and uh you won't
always want uh to, to do that. So I,
I don't think it is helpful in general to
talk about whether pluralism is a good thing or
a bad thing uh In, in science. I mean,
I have colleagues who have articulated certain um conceptions
of pluralism. Um BUT, you know, for, for, for
the general case, but I'm not one of them,
I'm interested in pluralism in um um uh things
like thick concepts so well being and that um
I have uh studied at length, I think uh
the sciences of well being would really benefit from
um a certain kind of very principled uh pluralism.
So, and there is a big uh uh temptation
uh to um settle for example, on a single
number, a small number of core metrics of well
being um or mental health. Because if we all
collect data on the same thing, we'll be able
to co collate this data and to figure out
the effect sizes of certain in interventions and we'll
be able to uh act on, on, on that
material, right? So a lot of people, there's a
even a hashtag common measures on, on Twitter that
you could look up. Uh PEOPLE advocate um a
recent article says uh measures and are not like
toothbrushes, it's OK to re reuse them. Um Sure.
Yeah, it's OK to reuse them. Um But if
you, if you really are studying a thick concept
and a thick concept that is grounded in the
context in which it is used, then um uh
uh common measures won't work. Um And common measures
uh are great if you, if you think you
have a phenomenon that is, that has the same
definition across all contexts and means the same to
the same people, to, to, to different people and
doesn't need and, and can easily be transported from
Porto to Cambridge England. But that won't always be
the case. Um So, um I think pluralism about
uh measurement of uh well-being, pluralism about methods to
approach well-being is a recognition of the fact that
uh the concepts that we are interested in are
often grounded in the, in the little experience of
our uh existence and in the, the, the priorities
that our communities have. And um I, I do
realize that advocating that kind of uh pluralism, for
example, you know, like, you know, resist uh measurement
of life satisfaction for, for everyone because it doesn't
really carry enough information. Uh I, I realized that
it's controversial because yes, then it, you know, goes
against that idea of, you know, accumulating information and
cumulative science and building building on it. But it's
also the right thing to do I think because
uh we are not always studying the same thing.
So the kind of pluralism that I would like
to uh uh put my name under and uh
uh and, and explore and advocate is uh uh
a pluralism about measurement that is motivated explicitly uh
by the fact that uh the objects that we
study in science are often not very easily transportable
from one context to another. A lot of work
needs to be done in order to transport them.
Um And when they are transported, they often distort
reality uh and making signs more local and more
uh um yeah, less ambitious in some ways is,
is not a bad thing in those cases.
And so just to wrap up the interview, um
I mean, in the particular case of well being,
that would imply for example, that we would expect
that cross culturally, we would probably get a different
understandings of what, what well being is and perhaps
how it should be measured. Would that would that
be an example?
Definitely the rise of cross cultural measurement of well
being is one of the most interesting and controversial
trends uh in, in, in my view. And that
is because um there's a lot of demand uh
in the media even for these uh kind of
reports. World Happiness Report or, you know, world well
being ranking like is Finland always going to be
on top? What is it that the Finland Finland
has that other countries don't have that or you
know, Iberian countries in Latin America always comes out
quite good uh for on, on those, on those
rankings. Um uh AND Eastern Europe uh usually very
poorly. Uh Probably more so even now. Um uh
ARE these meaningful projects, are they? Well, um I
suppose it depends what your goal is, right? If
your goal is to um I don't know, maximally
compare countries possibly, but if your goal is to
really understand what well being means in different contexts
and uh how is it that people flourish in
different contexts? Uh Then um you probably, well, I
don't want to say that it's that, that it's
a bad idea to compare because compare is how
we learn and compare is how we um how
we make progress and how we, you know how
we make sense of each other. But comparison always
comes with a cost. Yes. And I do think
that uh it's important to really take the big
cross cultural comparisons with a grain of salt. But
it's also really important to figure out how to
do uh signs of well being in a way
that uh communicate the richness across and then in
and in a way that exposes um how many
different conceptions of well being there are across the
world and how they bleed into each other and
change and affect each other. So uh that's the
big circle that I would like to square
Great. So just to mention the book, we've been
focusing mostly on today. Again, limits of the numerical
abuses and uses of quantification. Um I'm leaving a
link to it in the description box of the
interview. And Doctor Alexandrova, apart from the book, would
you like to tell people where they can find
you and your work on the internet?
Uh Thank you. So I am um um I
teach and do most of my work in uh
Cambridge England and I have a great uh uh
commitment to open access of my work to the
extent that I can. Um I therefore um uh
place uh you know, all of the writings to
the extent that it is legal uh of on
various um uh platforms such as fill papers or
my university's open access scheme. Uh I am uh
um as a, as a, as far as media
engagement is concerned, I'm on uh blue sky um
right now uh no longer on Twitter. And I
really uh welcome uh feedback and I welcome es
especially uh um scientists and practitioners experience about uh
uh studying what might look like a thick concept
in doing that uh uh with uh kind of
responsible recognition of the value judgments involved. I, I
welcome very much uh uh feedback and also sharing
uh people's experience of how to do that well.
Mhm Very well. So I will be also leaving
some links to the rest of your work in
the description box of the interview. And thank you
so much again for taking the time to come
on the show. It's been really a pleasure to
talk to you.
Thank you for your work, Ricardo. I really appreciate
the opportunity.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew
Whitten Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors,
Philip Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
NAI Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor
Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger and
H her meal and Lain Jung Y and the
Samuel K Hes. Mark Smith J Tom Hummel s
Friends, David Sloan Wilson Yaar, Ro Ro Die Jan
Punter, Romani Charlotte, Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavla
Stassi Nale medicine, Gary G Almansa Zal Ari and
YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas
Fry, Franka La Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary FTD
and W Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke
Loki, Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Wo David
Williams Di Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore, Larry Dey Junior, Old
Ebon Starry Michael Bailey. Then spur by Robert Grassy
Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake. Zul Barnabas Radick, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dvor. Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin
Gilbert Jessica. No week, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perras, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi
Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins
of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A
special thanks to my producers is our web, Jim
Frank Luca Toni, Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes
Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
John Carl Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And
to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan
Knits and Rosie. Thank you for all.